# ARM Object Format

Source: [ARM Object Format (AOF-2002.txt)](https://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~theom/riscos/docs/CodeStds/AOF-2002.txt)

## Introduction

This document defines a file format called **ARM Object Format** or **AOF**, which is used by language processors for ARM-based systems.

The ARM linker accepts input files in this format and can generate output in the same format, as well as in a variety of image formats. The ARM linker is described in *The ARM Linker (armlink)* of the User Manual.

In the rest of this document, the term *object file* refers to a file in ARM Object Format, and the term *linker* refers to the ARM linker.

ARM Object Format directly supports the ARM Procedure Call standard (APCS), which is described in *ARM Procedure Call Standard*.

## Acknowledgements

This document is based on an undated original circa 1986, by Mick Jordan of Acorn Research Centre, Palo Alto.

## About AOF

AOF is a simple object format, similar in complexity and expressive power to Unix's *a.out* format. As will be seen, it provides a generalised superset of a.out's descriptive facilities (though this was neither an original design goal nor an influence on the early development of AOF).

AOF was designed to be simple to generate and to process, rather than to be maximally expressive or maximally compact.

## Terminology

The terms *byte, half word, word*, and *string* are used to mean:

```text
byte      8 bits; considered unsigned unless otherwise stated; usually
          used to store flag bits or characters;

half word 16 bits, or 2 bytes; usually considered unsigned;

word      32 bits, or 4 bytes; usually considered unsigned;

string    a sequence of bytes terminated by a NUL (0x00) byte. The NUL
          byte is part of the string but is not counted in the string's
          length.
```

## Byte Sex or Endian-ness

There are two sorts of AOF: *little-endian* and *big-endian*.

In little-endian AOF, the least significant byte of a word or half-word has the lowest address of any byte in the (half-)word. This *byte sex* is used by DEC, Intel and Acorn, amongst others.

In big-endian AOF, the most significant byte of a (half-)word has the lowest address. This byte sex is used by IBM, Motorola and Apple, amongst others.

For data in a file, *address* means *offset from the start of the file*.

There is no guarantee that the endian-ness of an AOF file will be the same as the endian-ness of the system used to process it (the endian-ness of the file is always the same as the endian-ness of the target ARM system).

The two sorts of AOF cannot be mixed (the target system cannot have mixed endian-ness: it must have one or the other). Thus the ARM linker will accept inputs of either sex and produce an output of the same sex, but will reject inputs of mixed endian-ness.

## Alignment

Strings and bytes may be aligned on any byte boundary.

AOF fields defined in this document make no use of half-words and align words on 4-byte boundaries.

Within the contents of an AOF file the alignment of words and half-words is defined by the use to which AOF is being put. For all current ARM-based systems, words are aligned on 4-byte boundaries and half-words on 2-byte boundaries.

## The Overall Structure of an AOF File

An AOF file contains a number of separate but related pieces of data. To simplify access to these data, and to give a degree of extensibility to tools which process AOF, the object file format is itself layered on another format called *Chunk File Format*, which provides a simple and efficient means of accessing and updating distinct chunks of data within a single file. The object file format defines five chunks:

- the AOF header
- the AOF areas
- the producer's identification
- the symbol table
- the string table

These are described in detail after the description of Chunk File Format.

## Chunk File Format

A chunk is accessed via a header at the start of the file. The header contains the number, size, location and identity of each chunk in the file.

The size of the header may vary between different chunk files, but is fixed for each file. Not all entries in a header need be used, thus limited expansion of the number of chunks is permitted without a wholesale copy.

A chunk file can be copied without knowledge of the contents of its chunks.

Pictorially, the layout of a chunk file is as follows:

```text
         ----------------------------
         |       ChunkFileId        |  }
         ----------------------------  } Fixed part of header
         |       maxChunks          |  } occupies 3 words and
         ----------------------------  } describes what follows
         |       numChunks          |  }
         ============================
         |        entry_1           |  4 words per entry
         |                          |
         ----------------------------
         |        entry_2           |
         |                          |
         ----------------------------
                   ...
         ----------------------------
         |     entry_maxChunks      |
         |                          |  End of Header
         ============================  (3 + 4*maxChunks words)
         |        chunk_1           |
         |                          |  Start of Data Chunks
         ----------------------------
                   ...
         ----------------------------
         |    chunk_numChunks       |
         |                          |
         ----------------------------
```

`ChunkFileId` marks the file as a chunk file. Its value is `0xC3CBC6C5`. The endian-ness of the chunk file can be deduced from this value (if, when read as a word, it appears to be `0xC5C6CBC3` then each word value must be byte-reversed before use).

The `maxChunks` field defines the number of the entries in the header, fixed when the file is created. The `numChunks` field defines how many chunks are currently used in the file, which can vary from `0` to `maxChunks`.

`numChunks` is redundant in that it can be found by scanning the entries.

Each entry in the chunk file header consists of four words in order:

- `chunkId` is an 8-byte field identifying what data the chunk contains; (note that this is an 8-byte field, *not* a 2-word field, so it has the same byte order independent of endian-ness);
- `fileOffset` is a one word field defining the byte offset within the file of the start of the chunk. All chunks are word-aligned, so it must be divisible by four. A value of zero indicates that the chunk entry is unused;
- `size` is a one word field defining the exact byte size of the chunk's contents (which need not be a multiple of four).

The `chunkId` field provides a conventional way of identifying what type of data a chunk contains. It is split into two parts. The first four characters contain a unique name allocated by a central authority. The remaining four characters can be used to identify component chunks within this domain. The 8 characters are stored in ascending address order, as if they formed part of a NUL-terminated string, independently of endian-ness.

For AOF files, the first part of each chunk's name is `"OBJ_"`; the second components are defined in the next section.

## ARM Object Format

Each piece of an object file is stored in a separate, identifiable, chunk. AOF defines five chunks as follows:

| Chunk | Chunk Name |
|---|---|
| AOF Header | `OBJ_HEAD` |
| Areas | `OBJ_AREA` |
| Identification | `OBJ_IDFN` |
| Symbol Table | `OBJ_SYMT` |
| String Table | `OBJ_STRT` |

Only the *header* and *areas* chunks must be present, but a typical object file contains all five of the above chunks.

Each name in an object file is encoded as an offset into the string table, stored in the `OBJ_STRT` chunk (see *The String Table chunk (OBJ_STRT)*). This allows the variable-length nature of names to be factored out from primary data formats.

A feature of ARM Object Format is that chunks may appear in any order in the file (indeed, the ARM C Compiler and the ARM Assembler produce their AOF chunks in different orders).

A language translator or other utility may add additional chunks to an object file, for example a language-specific symbol table or language-specific debugging data. Therefore it is conventional to allow space in the chunk header for additional chunks; space for eight chunks is conventional when the AOF file is produced by a language processor which generates all 5 chunks described here.

The AOF header chunk should not be confused with the chunk file's header.

### Format of the AOF Header Chunk

The AOF header consists of two parts, which appear contiguously in the header chunk. The first part is of fixed size and describes the contents and nature of the object file. The second part has a variable length (specified in the fixed part of the header), and consists of a sequence of *area declarations* describing the code and data areas within the `OBJ_AREA` chunk.

Pictorially, the AOF header chunk has the following format:

```text
         ----------------------------
         |    Object File Type      |
         ----------------------------
         |    Version Id            |
         ----------------------------
         |    Number of Areas       |
         ----------------------------
         |    Number of Symbols     |
         ----------------------------
         |    Entry Area Index      |
         ----------------------------
         |    Entry Offset          |  6 words in the fixed part
         ============================
         |    1st Area Header       |  5 words per area header
         |                          |
         ----------------------------
         |    2nd Area Header       |
         |                          |
         ----------------------------
              ... ...  ...
         ----------------------------
         |    nth Area Header       |  (6 + (5*Number_of_Areas)) words
         |                          |  in the AOF header.
         ----------------------------
```

An `Object File Type` of `0xC5E2D080` marks the file as being in *relocatable object format* (the usual output of compilers and assemblers and the usual input to the linker).

The endian-ness of the object code can be deduced from this value and shall be identical to the endian-ness of the containing chunk file.

The `Version Id` encodes the version of AOF to which the object file complies: version 1.50 is denoted by decimal 150; version 2.00 by 200; and this version by decimal 310 (`0x136`).

The code and data of an object file are encapsulated in a number of separate *areas* in the `OBJ_AREA` chunk, each with a name and some attributes. Each area is described in the variable-length part of the AOF header which immediately follows the fixed part. `Number of Areas` gives the number of areas in the file and, equivalently, the number of area declarations which follow the fixed part of the AOF header.

If the object file contains a symbol table chunk (named `OBJ_SYMT`), then `Number of Symbols` records the number of symbols in the symbol table.

One of the areas in an object file may be designated as containing the start address of any program which is linked to include the file. If this is the case, the entry address is specified as an `Entry Area Index, Entry Offset` pair. `Entry Area Index`, in the range 1 to `Number of Areas`, gives the 1-origin index in the following array of area headers of the area containing the entry point. The entry address is defined to be the base address of this area plus `Entry Offset`.

A value of 0 for `Entry Area Index` signifies that no program entry address is defined by this AOF file.

### Format of Area Headers

The area headers follow the fixed part of the AOF header. Each area header has the following format:

```text
Area name                       (offset into string table)
Attributes + Alignment
Area Size
Number of Relocations
Base Address or 0               5 words in total
```

Each area within an object file must be given a name which is unique amongst all the areas in the file. `Area Name` gives the offset of that name in the string table (stored in the `OBJ_STRT` chunk).

The `Area Size` field gives the size of the area in bytes, which must be a multiple of 4. Unless the *Not Initialised* bit (bit 4) is set in the area attributes (see *Attributes + Alignment*), there must be this number of bytes for this area in the `OBJ_AREA` chunk. If the *Not Initialised* bit is set, then there shall be no initialising bytes for this area in the `OBJ_AREA` chunk.

The `Number of Relocations` word specifies the number of relocation directives which apply to this area (equivalently: the number of relocation records following the area's contents in the `OBJ_AREA` chunk).

The `Base Address` field is unused unless the area has the absolute attribute. In this case the field records the base address of the area. In general, giving an area a base address prior to linking, will cause problems for the linker and may prevent linking altogether, unless only a single object file is involved.

### Attributes + Alignment

Each area has a set of attributes encoded in the most-significant 24 bits of the `Attributes + Alignment` word. The least-significant 8 bits of this word encode the alignment of the start of the area as a power of 2 and shall have a value between 2 and 32 (this value denotes that the area should start at an address divisible by `2^alignment`).

The linker orders areas in a generated image first by attributes, then by the (case-significant) lexicographic order of area names, then by position of the containing object module in the link list. The position in the link list of an object module loaded from a library is not predictable.

The precise significance to the linker of area attributes depends on the output being generated.

- **Bit 8** encodes the *absolute* attribute and denotes that the area must be placed at its `Base Address`. This bit is not usually set by language processors.
- **Bit 9** encodes the *code* attribute: if set the area contains code; otherwise it contains data.
- **Bits 10, 11** encode the *common block definition* and *common block reference* attributes, respectively.
- **Bit 10** specifies that the area is a common definition.
- **Bit 11** defines the area to be a reference to a common block, and precludes the area having initialising data (effectively implies bit 12).
- If both bits 10 and 11 are set, bit 11 is ignored.

Common areas with the same name are overlaid on each other by the linker. The `Area Size` field of a common definition area defines the size of a common block. All other references to this common block must specify a size which is smaller or equal to the definition size. If, in a link step, there is more than one definition of an area with the *common definition* attribute (bit 10 set), then each of these areas must have exactly the same contents. If there is no definition of a common area, its size will be the size of the largest common reference to it.

Although common areas conventionally hold data, it is legal to use bit 10 in conjunction with bit 9 to define a common block containing code.

- **Bit 12** encodes the *zero-initialised* attribute, specifying that the area has no initialising data in this object file, and that the area contents are missing from the `OBJ_AREA` chunk.
- This attribute is incompatible with the read-only attribute (bit 13).
- A combination of bit 10 (common definition) and bit 12 (zero initialised) has exactly the same meaning as bit 11 (reference to common).
- **Bit 13** encodes the *read only* attribute and denotes that the area will not be modified following relocation by the linker.
- **Bit 14** encodes the *position independent* (PI) attribute, usually only of significance for code areas.
- **Bit 15** encodes the *debugging table* attribute and denotes that the area contains symbolic debugging tables.

Usually, debugging tables are read-only and therefore have bit 13 set also. In debugging table areas, bit 9 (the *code* attribute) is ignored.

Bits 16-19 encode additional attributes of code areas and shall be non-0 only if the area has the code attribute (bit 9 set).

- **Bit 16**: *32-bit PC attribute*.
- **Bit 17**: *reentrant* attribute.
- **Bit 18**: code uses ARM extended floating-point instruction set.
- **Bit 19**: *No Software Stack Check* attribute.

Bits 20-27 encode additional attributes of data areas, and shall be non-0 only if the area does not have the code attribute.

- **Bit 20**: *based* attribute.
- **Bit 21**: *Shared Library Stub Data* attribute.
- **Bits 22-23**: reserved, must be 0.
- **Bits 24-27**: base register used to address a based area.
- **Bits 28-31**: reserved, must be 0.

### Area Attributes Summary

| Bit | Mask | Attribute Description |
|---:|---|---|
| 8 | `0x00000100` | Absolute attribute |
| 9 | `0x00000200` | Code attribute |
| 10 | `0x00000400` | Common block definition |
| 11 | `0x00000800` | Common block reference |
| 12 | `0x00001000` | Uninitialised (0-initialised) |
| 13 | `0x00002000` | Read only |
| 14 | `0x00004000` | Position independent |
| 15 | `0x00008000` | Debugging tables |
| 16 | `0x00010000` | Complies with the 32-bit APCS (code areas only) |
| 17 | `0x00020000` | Reentrant code (code areas only) |
| 18 | `0x00040000` | Uses extended FP inst set (code areas only) |
| 19 | `0x00080000` | No software stack checking (code areas only) |
| 20 | `0x00100000` | Thumb code (else ARM) (code areas only) |
| 21 | `0x00200000` | Uses halfword instructions (code areas only) |
| 22 | `0x00400000` | Has ARM/Thumb interworking (code areas only) |
| 20 | `0x00100000` | Based area (data areas only) |
| 21 | `0x00200000` | Shared library stub data (data areas only) |
| 24-27 | `0x0F000000` | Base register for based area (data areas only) |

## Format of the Areas Chunk

The areas chunk (`OBJ_AREA`) contains the actual area contents (code, data, debugging data, etc.) together with their associated relocation data. Its `chunkId` is `"OBJ_AREA"`. Pictorially, an area's layout is:

```text
Area 1

Area 1 Relocation

. . .

Area n

Area n Relocation
```

An area is simply a sequence of byte values. The endian-ness of the words and half-words within it shall agree with that of the containing AOF file.

An area is followed by its associated table of relocation directives (if any). An area is either completely initialised by the values from the file or is initialised to zero, as specified by bit 12 of its area attributes.

Both the area contents and the table of relocation directives are aligned to 4-byte boundaries.

### Relocation Directives

A relocation directive describes a value which is computed at link time or load time, but which cannot be fixed when the object module is created.

In the absence of applicable relocation directives, the value of a byte, halfword, word or instruction from the preceding area is exactly the value that will appear in the final image.

A field may be subject to more than one relocation.

Pictorially, a relocation directive looks like:

```text
         ----------------------------
         |         Offset           |
         ----------------------------
         |100|B|A|R|FT|  24-bit SID |
         ----------------------------
```

`Offset` is the byte offset in the preceding area of the subject field to be relocated by a value calculated as described below.

The interpretation of the 24-bit `SID` field depends on the `A` bit.

- If `A` (bit 27) is 1, the subject field is relocated by the value of the symbol of which `SID` is the 0-origin index in the symbol table chunk.
- If `A` (bit 27) is 0, the subject field is relocated by the base of the area of which `SID` is the 0-origin index in the array of areas.

The 2-bit field type `FT` (bits 25, 24) describes the subject field:

- `00`: byte
- `01`: half-word (2 bytes)
- `10`: word (4 bytes)
- `11`: instruction or instruction sequence

Bytes, halfwords and instructions may only be relocated by values of suitably small size. Overflow is faulted by the linker.

An ARM branch, or branch-with-link instruction is always a suitable subject for a relocation directive of field type *instruction*.

If the subject field is an instruction sequence, then `Offset` addresses the first instruction of the sequence and the `II` field (bits 29 and 30) constrains how many instructions may be modified by this directive:

- `00`: no constraint
- `01`: linker modifies at most 1 instruction
- `10`: linker modifies at most 2 instructions
- `11`: linker modifies at most 3 instructions

The way the relocation value is used to modify the subject field is determined by the `R` (PC-relative) bit, modified by the `B` (based) bit.

`R=1` and `B=0` specifies PC-relative relocation:

```c
subject_field = subject_field + (relocation_value -
                  base_of_area_containing(subject_field));
```

As a special case, if `A=0`, and the relocation value is specified as the base of the area containing the subject field, then it is not added and:

```c
subject_field = subject_field - base_of_area_containing(subject_field);
```

`R=1, B=1` denotes use of the inter-link-unit value of a branch destination.

`R=0` and `B=0` specifies plain additive relocation:

```c
subject_field = subject_field + relocation_value;
```

`R=0` and `B=1` specifies based area relocation. The relocation value must be an address within a based data area:

```c
subject_field = subject_field + (relocation_value -
                  base_of_area_group_containing(relocation_value));
```

Bits 29 and 30 of the relocation flags word shall be 0; bit 31 shall be 1.

## The Format of the Symbol Table chunk (OBJ_SYMT)

The `Number of Symbols` field in the fixed part of the AOF header (`OBJ_HEAD` chunk) defines how many entries there are in the symbol table. Each symbol table entry has the following format:

```text
Name
Attributes
Value
Area Name           4 words per entry
```

`Name` is the offset in the string table (in chunk `OBJ_STRT`) of the character string name of the symbol.

`Value` is only meaningful if the symbol is a defining occurrence (bit 0 of `Attributes` set), or a common symbol (bit 6 of `Attributes` set):

- if the symbol is *absolute* (bits 0 and 2 of `Attributes` set), this field contains the value of the symbol;
- if the symbol is a common symbol (bit 6 of `Attributes` set), this field contains the byte-length of the referenced common area;
- otherwise, `Value` is interpreted as an offset from the base address of the area named by `Area Name`, which must be an area defined in this object file.

`Area Name` is meaningful only if the symbol is a non-absolute defining occurrence (bit 0 set, bit 2 unset). In this case it gives the index into the string table for the name of the area in which the symbol is defined (which must be an area in this object file).

### Symbol Attributes

The `Symbol Attributes` word is interpreted as follows:

- **Bit 0** denotes that the symbol is defined in this object file.
- **Bit 1** denotes that the symbol has global scope and can be matched by the linker to a similarly named symbol from another object file.

Specifically:

- `01` (bit 1 unset, bit 0 set): symbol is defined in this object file and has scope limited to this object file.
- `10` (bit 1 set, bit 0 unset): symbol is a reference to a symbol defined in another object file.
- `11`: symbol is defined in this object file with global scope.
- `00`: reserved.

- **Bit 2** encodes the *absolute* attribute (meaningful only if bit 0 set).
- **Bit 3** encodes the *case insensitive reference* attribute (meaningful only if bit 0 unset).
- **Bit 4** encodes the *weak* attribute (meaningful only if bits 1,0 = `10`).
- **Bit 5** encodes the *strong* attribute (meaningful only if bits 1,0 = `11`).
- **Bit 6** encodes the *common* attribute (meaningful only if bits 1,0 = `10`).
- **Bit 7** is reserved and shall be set to 0.

Bits 8-11 encode additional attributes of symbols defined in code areas:

- **Bit 8**: *code datum* attribute.
- **Bit 9**: *floating-point arguments in floating-point registers* attribute.
- **Bit 10**: reserved, must be 0.
- **Bit 11**: *simple leaf function* attribute.
- **Bit 12**: *Thumb* attribute.
- **Bits 13-31**: reserved, must be 0.

### Symbol Attribute Summary

| Bit | Mask | Attribute Description |
|---:|---|---|
| 0 | `0x00000001` | Symbol is defined in this file |
| 1 | `0x00000002` | Symbol has global scope |
| 2 | `0x00000004` | Absolute attribute |
| 3 | `0x00000008` | Case-insensitive attribute |
| 4 | `0x00000010` | Weak attribute |
| 5 | `0x00000020` | Strong attribute |
| 6 | `0x00000040` | Common attribute |
| 8 | `0x00000100` | Code area datum attribute (code symbols only) |
| 9 | `0x00000200` | FP args in FP regs attribute (code symbols only) |
| 11 | `0x00000800` | Simple leaf function attribute (code symbols only) |
| 12 | `0x00001000` | Thumb attribute (code symbols only) |

## The String Table chunk (OBJ_STRT)

The string table chunk contains all the print names referred to from the *header* and *symbol table* chunks. This separation is made to factor out the variable length characteristic of print names from the key data structures.

A print name is stored in the string table as a sequence of non-control characters (codes 32-126 and 160-255) terminated by a NUL (0) byte, and is identified by an offset from the start of the table. The first 4 bytes of the string table contain its length (including the length of its length word), so no valid offset into the table is less than 4, and no table has length less than 4.

The endian-ness of the length word shall be identical to the endian-ness of the AOF and chunk files containing it.

## The Identification chunk (OBJ_IDFN)

This chunk should contain a string of printable characters (codes 10-13 and 32-126) terminated by a NUL (0) byte, which gives information about the name and version of the tool which generated the object file. Use of codes in the range 128-255 is discouraged, as the interpretation of these values is host dependent.
